Collapsing search results new page added to documentation (#7919)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/collapse-search.md

---
layout: default
title: Collapse search results
nav_order: 3
---

# Collapse search results

> The collapse parameter in OpenSearch enables you to group search results by a particular field value, returning only the top document within each group. This feature is useful for reducing redundancy in search results by eliminating duplicates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The collapse parameter groups search results by a particular field value. This returns only the top document within each group, which helps reduce redundancy by eliminating duplicates.
```

> The collapse feature requires the field to be collapsed to be either a `keyword` or a `numeric` type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The collapse feature requires the field being collapsed to be either a `keyword` or a `numeric` type.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

---

```

> ## Example of collapsing search results

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: Collapsing search results
```

> To populate our index with the data needed, we will define our index mappings and define an `item` field indexed as a `keyword`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To populate the index with the data needed, first define the index mappings and an `item` field indexed as a `keyword`. 
```

#### Define the index mappings

```json
PUT /bakery-items
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "item": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "category": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "price": {
        "type": "float"
      },
      "baked_date": {
        "type": "date"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### Populate the index

```json
POST /bakery-items/_bulk
{ "index": {} }
{ "item": "Chocolate Cake", "category": "cakes", "price": 15, "baked_date": "2023-07-01T00:00:00Z" }
{ "index": {} }
{ "item": "Chocolate Cake", "category": "cakes", "price": 18, "baked_date": "2023-07-04T00:00:00Z" }
{ "index": {} }
{ "item": "Vanilla Cake", "category": "cakes", "price": 12, "baked_date": "2023-07-02T00:00:00Z" }
```

#### Search the index, returning all results

```json
GET /bakery-items/_search
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "category": "cakes"
    }
  },
  "sort": ["price"]
}
```

> The previous query will return the uncollapsed search results, showing all the documents, including both entries for "Chocolate Cake."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This query returns the uncollapsed search results, showing all the documents, including both entries for "Chocolate Cake."
```

#### Search the index and collapse the results

To collapse search results by the `item` field and sort them by `price`, you can use the following query:

> **Search query that collapses the results on the item field**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Collapsed search results on item field**
```

          "price": 12,
          "baked_date": "2023-07-02T00:00:00Z",
          "baker": "Baker A"
        },
        "fields": {
          "item": [
            "Vanilla Cake"
          ]
        },
        "sort": [
          12
        ]
      },
      {
        "_index": "bakery-items",
        "_id": "loSga5EB2HLDXHkv9kAr",
        "_score": null,
        "_source": {
          "item": "Chocolate Cake",
          "category": "cakes",
          "price": 15,
          "baked_date": "2023-07-01T00:00:00Z",
          "baker": "Baker A"
        },
        "fields": {
          "item": [
            "Chocolate Cake"
          ]
        },
        "sort": [
          15
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The collapsed search results example will show only one "Chocolate Cake" entry, demonstrating how collapsing works in reducing redundancy.

Collapsing affects only the top search results and does not change any aggregation results. The total number of hits shown in the response reflects all matching documents before collapsing is applied, including duplicates. However, the response doesn't tell you the exact number of unique groups formed by collapsing.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

---

```

> ### Expanding collapsed results

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Expanding collapsed results
```

You can expand each collapsed top hit with the `inner_hits` property. 

> To demonstrate multiple inner hits, we'll retrieve the cheapest and most recent items for each type of cake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example request applies `inner_hits` to retrieve the cheapest and most recent items for each type of cake.
```

```json
GET /bakery-items/_search
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "category": "cakes"
    }
  },
  "collapse": {
    "field": "item",
    "inner_hits": [
      {
        "name": "cheapest_items",
        "size": 1,
        "sort": ["price"]
      },
      {
        "name": "newest_items",
        "size": 1,
        "sort": [{ "baked_date": "desc" }]
      }
    ]
  },
  "sort": ["price"]
}

```

### Multiple inner hits for each collapsed hit

> To obtain several groups of inner hits for each collapsed result, you can set different criteria for each group. For example, you could request the three least expensive items and the three most recent items for every bakery item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To obtain several groups of inner hits for each collapsed result, you can set different criteria for each group. For example, you could request the three lowest priced items and the three most recent items for every bakery item.
```

```json
GET /bakery-items/_search
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "category": "cakes"
    }
  },
  "collapse": {
    "field": "item",
    "inner_hits": [
      {
        "name": "cheapest_items",
        "size": 1,
        "sort": ["price"]
      },
      {
        "name": "newest_items",
        "size": 3,
        "sort": [{ "baked_date": "desc" }]
      }
    ]
  },
  "sort": ["price"]
}

```

> This query searches for documents in the `cakes` category and groups the search results by the `item_name` field. For each `item_name`, it retrieves the top 3 cheapest items and the top 3 most recent items, sorted by the `baked_date` in descending order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This query searches for documents in the `cakes` category and groups the search results by the `item_name` field. For each `item_name`, it retrieves the top three lowest priced items and the top three most recent items, sorted by `baked_date` in descending order.
```

> The expansion of the group is done by sending an additional query for each inner hit request for each collapsed hit returned in the response. This can significantly slow down the process if there are too many groups and/or inner hit requests. The max_concurrent_group_searches request parameter can be used to control the maximum number of concurrent searches allowed in this phase. The default is based on the number of data nodes and the default search thread pool size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expanding the groups is done by sending an additional query for each inner hit request for each collapsed hit returned in the response. This can significantly slow down the process if there are too many groups or inner hit requests. The `max_concurrent_group_searches` request parameter can be used to control the maximum number of concurrent searches allowed in this phase. The default is based on the number of data nodes and the default search thread pool size.
```

> By using collapsing and inner hits effectively, you can manage large datasets in your bakery inventory, reduce redundancy, and focus on the most relevant information. This technique helps streamline search results, providing a clear and concise view of your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: I deleted this last paragraph because it's more marketing than technical info.

#### Define the index mappings

```json
PUT /bakery-items
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "item": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "category": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "price": {
        "type": "float"
      },
      "baked_date": {
        "type": "date"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

#### Populate the index

```json
POST /bakery-items/_bulk
{ "index": {} }
{ "item": "Chocolate Cake", "category": "cakes", "price": 15, "baked_date": "2023-07-01T00:00:00Z" }
{ "index": {} }
{ "item": "Chocolate Cake", "category": "cakes", "price": 18, "baked_date": "2023-07-04T00:00:00Z" }
{ "index": {} }
{ "item": "Vanilla Cake", "category": "cakes", "price": 12, "baked_date": "2023-07-02T00:00:00Z" }
```

#### Search the index, returning all results

```json
GET /bakery-items/_search
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "category": "cakes"
    }
  },
  "sort": ["price"]
}
```

This query returns the uncollapsed search results, showing all the documents, including both entries for "Chocolate Cake."

#### Search the index and collapse the results

> To collapse search results by the `item` field and sort them by `price`, you can use the following query:

Reviewer: @leanneeliatra @natebower Would it be clearer to say "To group search results by `item` field..."?

    "skipped": 0,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 4,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": null,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "bakery-items",
        "_id": "mISga5EB2HLDXHkv9kAr",
        "_score": null,
        "_source": {
          "item": "Vanilla Cake",
          "category": "cakes",
          "price": 12,
          "baked_date": "2023-07-02T00:00:00Z",
          "baker": "Baker A"
        },
        "fields": {
          "item": [
            "Vanilla Cake"
          ]
        },
        "sort": [
          12
        ]
      },
      {
        "_index": "bakery-items",
        "_id": "loSga5EB2HLDXHkv9kAr",
        "_score": null,
        "_source": {
          "item": "Chocolate Cake",
          "category": "cakes",
          "price": 15,
          "baked_date": "2023-07-01T00:00:00Z",
          "baker": "Baker A"
        },
        "fields": {
          "item": [
            "Chocolate Cake"
          ]
        },
        "sort": [
          15
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The collapsed search results example will show only one "Chocolate Cake" entry, demonstrating how collapsing works in reducing redundancy.

> 

Author: It does, thanks for checking.

Collapsing affects only the top search results and does not change any aggregation results. The total number of hits shown in the response reflects all matching documents before collapsing is applied, including duplicates. However, the response doesn't tell you the exact number of unique groups formed by collapsing.

> 

Author: It does, thanks for checking.

---

## Expanding collapsed results

You can expand each collapsed top hit with the `inner_hits` property. 

The following example request applies `inner_hits` to retrieve the lowest priced and most recent items for each type of cake.

```json
GET /bakery-items/_search
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "category": "cakes"
    }
  },
  "collapse": {
    "field": "item",
    "inner_hits": [
      {
        "name": "cheapest_items",
        "size": 1,
        "sort": ["price"]
      },
      {
        "name": "newest_items",
        "size": 1,
        "sort": [{ "baked_date": "desc" }]
      }
    ]
  },
  "sort": ["price"]
}

```

### Multiple inner hits for each collapsed hit

To obtain several groups of inner hits for each collapsed result, you can set different criteria for each group. For example, you could request the three lowest priced items and the three most recent items for every bakery item.

> 

Reviewer 2: Line above: Is "recent items for every bakery item" redundant?

Author: Addressed this and made it read clearer.

> To obtain several groups of inner hits for each collapsed result, you can set different criteria for each group. For example, you could request the three lowest-priced items and the three most recent items for every bakery item:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To obtain several groups of inner hits for each collapsed result, you can set different criteria for each group. For example, you could request the three lowest-priced items and the three most recent items:
```

```json
GET /bakery-items/_search
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "category": "cakes"
    }
  },
  "collapse": {
    "field": "item",
    "inner_hits": [
      {
        "name": "cheapest_items",
        "size": 1,
        "sort": ["price"]
      },
      {
        "name": "newest_items",
        "size": 3,
        "sort": [{ "baked_date": "desc" }]
      }
    ]
  },
  "sort": ["price"]
}

```

> This query searches for documents in the `cakes` category and groups the search results by the `item_name` field. For each `item_name`, it retrieves the top three lowest priced items and the top three most recent items, sorted by `baked_date` in descending order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This query searches for documents in the `cakes` category and groups the search results by the `item_name` field. For each `item_name`, it retrieves the top three lowest-priced items and the top three most recent items, sorted by `baked_date` in descending order.
```

> Expanding the groups is done by sending an additional query for each inner hit request for each collapsed hit returned in the response. This can significantly slow down the process if there are too many groups or inner hit requests. The `max_concurrent_group_searches` request parameter can be used to control the maximum number of concurrent searches allowed in this phase. The default is based on the number of data nodes and the default search thread pool size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can expand the groups by sending an additional query for each inner hit request for each collapsed hit returned in the response. This can significantly slow down the process if there are too many groups or inner hit requests. The `max_concurrent_group_searches` request parameter can be used to control the maximum number of concurrent searches allowed in this phase. The default is based on the number of data nodes and the default search thread pool size.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Line above, first sentence: The repetition of "for each" reads a bit awkwardly.

Reviewer: @leanneeliatra @natebower Would it be clearer to say "corresponding to each collapsed hit..."

Author: Thank you, I have made this clearer as per @vagimeli suggestion.

---
layout: default
title: Collapse search results
nav_order: 3
---

# Collapse search results

> The collapse parameter in OpenSearch enables you to group search results by a particular field value, returning only the top document within each group. This feature is especially beneficial for reducing redundancy and enhancing performance when handling large datasets. By grouping these documents, you can streamline the search results and focus on unique entries, avoiding duplicates.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should say "enhancing performance" as collapse query will be worse than their counterpart non-collapse query with the same filter. It's more of a utility to remove redundancy of similar results from hits

Author: I have clarified this point, thank you.

### Example of collapsing search results

> To collapse search results by the `item` field and sort them by `price`, you can use the following query:

Reviewer 3: it would be nice if we can add search result as well demonstrating the purpose. So let's add 3 docs, 2 with same value for `item` field and collapse query should only return one of them.

Author: Great I have updated the docs and examples
